Created by Bodhisattva Vasubandhu.
Translated by the Tang Tripiṭaka Master Xuanzang.
In various scriptures the Bhagavat has taught the three kinds of actions: bodily
action, verbal action, and mental action.
The  theory holds that a bodily action refers to what is done by
the body. Since language itself is an act, it is called a verbal action. In themselves, these two can be either acts of communicating information 
or not. A mental action refers to action concomitant with thinking and consists
solely in mind.
What do you mean by “communicate”?
A bodily act of communicating consists in physical shape and is engendered
by mental states that take that  as object.
What shape?
The shape of the body.
If  is the physical shape of the body, then
why do you say that a bodily action is an act done by the body?
It is said to be physical shape of the body because  is constituted
by the individual members of the entire body. It is said to be done by the body
because  comes about in dependence on the primary elements of the
body. That which is predicated of the body as a whole also applies to its
members. In common parlance people say, “I live in the village” or “I live
in the forest,” [while in fact we live in houses in the village, or in groves in
the forest].
Why do you say that  is engendered by
mental states that take that  as object?
In order to exclude  the physical shape of the lips, because
 is not engendered by mental actions that
take that,  as their object. Rather, [the shape of the
lips] is engendered by mental states that take as their object the enunciation
of language. We also want to exclude shapes elicited from the mental states
of former aspirations, because  is not engendered by mental states that take those  as its object.
Rather, these  are engendered by mental states that have
a residual cause for maturation.
Why is  said to be communicative?
Because a mind that informs and manifests an act, which it itself has
engendered, communicates that to others. In order to clarify this, we present
a stanza:
Since we manifest outwardly through the body and speech,
We communicate the volitions of our inner mind.
Just as a fish hidden in the deep
Communicates its presence by beating the waves.
What then is physical shape?
This refers to  long, [short, square, circular,
high, low, same, different].
But what is length, etc.?
This refers to that by which the ideas designated as long, etc. are engendered.
In what sphere is  included?
It is included in the sphere of physical form.
Critique of the Theory that the Communicative Act is Shape
Now, we must carefully examine . Are [the shapes
of] length, etc. specific atoms, as are colors? Or are they composites of specific
atoms? Or are they a discrete and unique reality pervading the composites
of color?
What errors are these in these options?
If  length, etc. were a specific atom, then it would be analogous to color. Then in each and every minute part of a physical composite
 length, etc. would be apprehensible.
If  were a composite of specific atoms, then
would there be no difference between  and a composite of
the atoms of color? And then the specificity of the composites of all the colors
would themselves have to be long, etc.!
If  were a discrete and unique reality pervading
the composites of colors, then, because it is both unique and pervasive it
would be found in each and every part, since it would be concomitantly
present in all parts. It would not then be unique, however, for it would abide
separately in all the parts.
Moreover, this  refutes your own  tenet that the ten
spheres are all composites of atoms, and it confirms the  thesis of
Kaṇāda’s followers that substances exist in the parts because they pervade
all the parts, i.e., in all the composite physical matter so united.
 the notion of “length” occurs when one sees a
great quantity lying in a single direction. The notion of “short” occurs when
one sees a small quantity lying in one direction. The notion of “square” occurs
when one sees  equal in four directions. The notion of “circle”
occurs when one sees  full in all directions. The notion of
“high” occurs when one sees a protrusion jutting out from a center. The notion
of “low” occurs when one sees a hollow indentation in a center. The notion
of “even” occurs when one sees a surface that is level. The notion of “uneven”
occurs when one sees a surface that in irregular. We conceive various different
notions of shape as we roll out and inspect a brocaded tapestry, but, just as
with colors, this does not mean that these various physical shapes really exist
together in the same one section. If we were to allow this to be the case, then
in each and every section we would engender the notions of all the shapes.
This is not what happens, however. Therefore, physical shapes have no distinct
reality. The colors seen in a squareshaped piece of linen do not simultaneously
engender the notion of length, such as might be  by a row of
trees or a column of ants. There is no logical error here!
If this is true , then how
is it that from a distance and in a dark place we do not discern color but we
do discern shape?
How is it that we do not discern the shape of  trees and yet
can discern the shape of a row of trees? Now, apart from the 
trees there is no separate row . Rather, in distant or darkened composite matter neither color nor shape is discernible. Even when we can
perceive , it remains unclear and we wonder what
it is that we are seeing. We conclude that we apprehend only color [and not
shape]. Our vision is indistinct when we are far away [from the observed
object] and in darkness. Therefore,  it is not logically proven that a communicative act is shape.
The Communicative Act as Movement
Another theory  holds that a bodily
act of communication consists in movement, engendered by mental states
that take  as object.
Why does  repeat  is engendered by mental states that take that as object?
In order to exclude the physical movement of the lips, because that  is engendered by mental states that take as object the enunciation of
language.
What does the term “movement” mean?
It means a change of position.
In what sphere is  included?
It is included in the sphere of physical form.
How does one know that  is a change in
position?
Because no specifying characteristic can be ascertained [in the bodily
act beyond its change in position].
Critique of the Theory that the Communicative Act is Movement
This reasoning [that it must be a change in position just because we cannot
ascertain the specifying characteristics of things] is invalid. Let us use as an
example the heating of objects . Although
 has come into direct contact with [agents that transform it, such
as] fire, sunlight, snow, vinegar, etc., and the causes for all these heatings are
indeed different, one cannot ascertain these specifying characteristics [in the
finished product]. Nevertheless, the  later state differs from its
former state. This is analogous [to the case of a bodily act of communication,
so you cannot claim that simply because we cannot ascertain its specifying
characteristics the bodily act of communication has no change beyond its
change in position, because we cannot ascertain those characteristics even
when things clearly do change].
Another example: comparable bunches of grass to be burned as fuel each
produce different flames. Although they are different, we cannot ascertain
their specifying characteristics. Nevertheless, those comparable [bunches of
grass] are certainly different. This is also analogous [with the bodily act of
communication. So although we cannot ascertain the specifying characteristics
of those acts, we should not conclude that they are all identical, except for
the change in the position of that body].
Suppose that when a fired product came into direct contact with the cause
 its characteristics as a fired product did not immediately arise—
even afterward they would not arise because that cause would not have
changed. If the comparable bunches of grass to be burned as fuel did not
each produce different flames, then the flames would have no cause to differ,
yet they do differ in their dimensions, luminescence, and heat.
Therefore, it does not follow that because specifying characteristics [of
a bodily act] cannot be ascertained, we must conclude that [a bodily act of
communication] is a change of position.  we must  carefully
examine and understand these specifying characteristics.
We claim that  is a change in the position
 because a cause for the extinction 
cannot be ascertained. [Such things as bodies have a certain duration and
do not perish from moment to moment, as they belong to the category of
things that do not perish instantaneously. Therefore, the only specifying characteristic of the bodily act of communication must be its change in position.]
This is also unreasonable. It is like mind, mental states, sound, light,
flames, etc., [all of which you include in the category of things that do perish
from moment to moment without a cause]. What cause for extinction do
these things have? Yet they do perish from moment to moment. This applies
also to the other things . Extinction does
not depend on a cause.
Mind, etc. do have a cause for extinction, however—each and every item
 is itself
characterized by impermanence.
Why then does this not apply to other things [and not just your restricted
list]? You recognize that the extinction of mind, etc. does not depend on a
cause. If that is true of mind etc., why is it not true of other things too?
If, in the case of things other than  extinction
did not depend on a cause, 
then the material nature  could not be ascertained even
before the wood had come into contact with flame, because  its later state
would be the same as its former state. How then could it be perceived at all?
[Let us take flame and sound, which you admit perishes from moment to
moment without any cause.] Before the wind has contacted the lamp and
before the hand has grasped the bell, the lamp’s flame and the bell’s sound
are distinctly perceptible, but this is not the case after [they have been touched
by the wind or grasped by the hand]. However, the extinction of the flame
and the sound do not depend on the wind or the hand . The same applies to the firewood.
This should present no logical difficulty. [All things perish from moment to
moment and need no cause for their extinction.]
Moreover, even if  the firewood is destroyed because of
the fire and its material nature cannot be perceived, then, at the very moment
it comes into contact  one would not perceive it, since when it
has come into contact it is altered.
Moreover, all heated products have degrees:slightly, medium, and completely
, although the external cause  remains unchanged.Although
these differences in the characteristics of what is heated do occur, their cause
is . Now, how could  be both the cause
for the later occurrence of the products fired and also the cause for their prior
extinction? It is impossible that that because of which a thing arises should
also be that because of which it is destroyed. Two contrary states do not have
a single common cause. Common sense confirms this! Conditioned things do
not depend on a cause for their extinction; they perish spontaneously. Whether
or not they are perceived asthey were, we must recognize that thisisthe specific
characteristic of either the evolutions or the extinctions of their continuities,
because they have a subtle progression.
Moreover, if things that are destroyed did indeed have a cause [for their
destruction], and thus there is nothing that is destroyed without a cause, then
the mind and mental states, etc., [which you assert need no cause for their
extinction], would need a cause for their extinction too, just as they need a
cause for their arising. Yet it is not true that there is a separate impermanence
 different from mind etc. Common sense confirms this!
Moreover, since these causes  would differ, the extinctions
would also be different, since fire, sunlight, snow, and vinegar differ and the
products prepared  differ.
Moreover, a thing already destroyed would again be destroyed, because
it would be granted a cause, just as physical form, etc.
Therefore, extinction definitely has no cause. Because extinction has no
cause, as soon as something occurs it immediately perishes. Thus we conclude
that  is not a change of place.
We claim that this state  is indeed a
change of position because no cause for the arising  is perceptible.
This is unreasonable because there is a cause for the arising [of a bodily
act of communication]. The prior state serves as cause for the later state. It
is just as the mind of a previous moment issues in the mind of a later moment.
It is just as a prior  heating issues in a later  heating;
just as milk issues in curdled cream; just as grape juice issues in wine, or as
wine issues into vinegar. Not the slightest thing changes position. Since there
is no change of position, what movement is there?
Moreover, [in your theory movement can take place in certain things, such
as physical bodies, because they are not destroyed from moment to moment
but have a certain duration of existence]. If they have such duration, however,
then they would have no movement—only something that is unmoving would
have stable duration. Even if a thing has no duration,  it would
still have no movement because something that perishes as soon as it arises
precludes movement.
If this is true, what is it that we observe as movement ?
That which is seen in another place is not the same thing as before.
How do you know that it is not the same thing as before?
Because new things arise in sundry places, like flames from a grass fire
or the play of shadows. The shadow of one place is not seen at another place.
A stationary form does not move but sunlight moves off and comes back and
one can see the shade that is produced, either long or short, or changing.
Moreover, when one covers the light only small streaks occur.
You are very critical! Why all these subtle objections against a change of
position? How can you be sure that what is seen in another place is not the
same thing as before?
We must repeat the above reasoning as proof. As we have explained, if
there is duration then there would be no movement, and so forth.
Moreover, even though an external cause of fire, etc. does not change,
afterward differences are perceived. Thus, we conclude that from moment
to moment there is a different thing.
Moreover, despite your argument that what is seen in another place is the
selfsame thing as before because there is no cause for these differences, you
have given no reason to show that it is indeed the same thing as before. So
why not grant that it is not the same thing as before? Both of these assertions
 remain unproven. Therefore, the assertion about change of place is invalid.
The Communicative Act as Wind
The Sauryodayika theory holds that all activity in fact does not change position, since conditioned things, of their nature, are destroyed from moment
to moment. However, there is a distinct reality that is the cause for a special
thought. This reality, arising in dependence on the hand, the foot, and so
forth, activates that hand or foot and is the reason something arises in a different position. This is what is termed movement and bodily communication.
In what sphere is it included?
In the sphere of physical form.
If this is true, then why can  not be seen with the eye,
as are all the colors ? If it cannot be seen, it
does not communicate to others. Why then call it communicative? How does
one even know this reality in fact exists? How does this reality cause the body
itself to move into another position and arise in a different manner?
We claim that the wind, arisen  from a special thought, is this
. The very essence of the wind element is movement. It is the general
cause whereby the foot changes its position. Apart from the wind, what 
element of movement can one identify?
Furthermore, even grasses and leaves have no separate movement apart
from the wind. How could they move about? Yet when the wind touches them
they all naturally begin to move. This is why we should conclude that this
 causes the hand to move its position. Why dither about other
theories?  either by their essence or by their activity cannot
engender any reality capable of movement.
Critique of the Theory that the Communicative Act is Wind
You incorrectly hold that the wind, engendered by a special thought, is
the generative cause whereby the hand alters its position, and that this is a
bodily act of communication. Since the wind has nothing whereby it communicates, however, how can you call it communicative?
Furthermore, how can you claim that the sphere of the tangible, [which
includes the wind,] is either morally good or bad? This is not 
a disciple of the Buddha!
If you incorrectly claim that a special thought causes the body itself to
arise in different positions, and that this bodily act is then bodily communication, such a bodily communication is  a verbal designation and not
real, because the body itself is essentially a composite of many elements.
Moreover, how can that which is not communicative be termed communicative? The nose and  do not communicate
with others.
Moreover, if you hold that the sense of smell [and the activities of the
other parts of the body] are either morally good or bad, this is not [a theory
of] a disciple of the Buddha!
If you incorrectly hold that physical color, arising from a special thought,
would be bodily communication,  physical color does
not arise from any special thought, it arises from its own seeds  and a
special wind. Moreover, if you hold that physical color is either good or bad,
this is not  a disciple of the Buddha!
Even if the essence of physical color is not a bodily communication, its
arising in other positions can still be a bodily communication.
Good heavens! You artfully exhaust your abilities discussing the act of
communicating and assiduously pile up whirling images. Even with the best
of effort, however, you cannot validate your demonstration. Why continue
to weary yourself in this regard? Who could prove that this arising [of physical
color] has a special reality ? If the arising
you propose is not homogeneous with physical form, etc., and what is seen
is not homogeneous with the eye, then how could the observer ever know
of its existence? And if it were invisible, how could it be termed communicative? It was explained above that  cannot communicate to
others! Moreover, if physical color is either morally good or bad, one could
claim that it engenders bodily acts of communication, but physical color is
neither morally good or bad, as we have explained above. Likewise, its arising
is . Therefore, it most certainly is not the bodily act of
communication!
If this is true, then acts of the body would be exclusively noncommunicative,
!
What do you identify as “noncommunicative”?
I refer to the physical form of discipline included within the sphere of
thought.
Then, in the realm of desire can a good noncommunicative  be elicited
apart from a communicative act?
What problem is there if in the realm of desire there is such a noncommunicative ?
It would have to flow from thought, as in the realm of form, [where noncommunicative acts are not engendered from communicative acts but from
a strong thought]. Then, when one has another thought or is unconscious,
there would be neither restraint nor its absence.
We avoid this error because we claim that 
endures for a time, since it has been projected at the appointed time by the
recitation .
How then could one who, when the Scripture on Discipline is recited,
keeps silent and says nothing during the appointed time 
incur the transgression of lying?
Moreover, , then there could be no morally neutral act of the body, because the
noncommunicative  is only of the two varieties [of morally good and
bad].
Also, there could be no bodily acts that are both good and bad at the same
moment, since all noncommunicative  have a definite continuity. A
weak thought does not engender a noncommunicative act, while that engendered by a strong thought maintains a definite continuity.

Even though one follows his whims and imagines really existent physical
acts of body and speech, still he cannot demonstrate that they are good or
bad. Why? Because what some call physical acts are entirely abandoned at
the end of life. How could they have a future result that is either agreeable
or disagreeable?
Some  say, “Why is this unreasonable? Past
acts essentially and really do exist, and can produce their fruit in the future.”
Critique of the Theory that Past Acts Really Exist
Pimples popping out of a boil! You claim even that past acts essentially
exist! The past means that which has previously existed but now no longer
exists. How can you claim that  essentially and really exist?
If you are correct, then how could the Bhagavat himself have said:
Acts, even after a hundred years pass by,
Still do not perish. When they encounter the convergence of
 conditions and an  occasion,
They necessarily bear their fruit.
What does this phrase “they do not perish” mean? It clearly means that
past acts do not lack their results, just as is shown in the latter half of the
stanza. Who does not admit that good or bad acts produce their results long
afterward? However, we must examine with care just how they produce those
results. Is it due to a special evolution in one’s mental continuity, just as rice
seeds produce their fruit? Or is it because their specific natures remain
unchanged over a long time and thus produce their results?
It is admissible to hold that they produce their results because of a special
evolution of mental continuity. If they produce their results because their specific natures remain unchanged over a long time, however, then you are saying
that these acts essentially do not come to an end even after a long time.
Our claim about these acts is that they are said to come to an end not
because their specific natures do not exist but because they have no further
activity.
How is it that they have no further activity?
Because they no longer can project a future result.
Why are they unable to project a future result?
Because having already projected that result, they are without ability in
its regard and cannot project it again. This is just as how things that have
already arisen do not arise again.
Since there is no limitation to the flow of similar results , why do they not project other similar results?
One would expect that a present result, having already been projected
once, would not necessarily project again. The essence of the act does not
perish but remains eternally in the present.
Why then does it not eternally project the result it has brought about?
Have I not just explained that it is unable to project again its already projected result, just as a thing that has already arisen does not arise again?
Why do you keep raising this objection?
Even though you have treated this above you have not resolved the difficulty. An act that essentially exists forever must be coextensive with time.
Being eternal, it should eternally project its results in the present. It should
constantly be able to arise anew as at its inception.
We hold that although a past act essentially exists it is not present, inasmuch
as it lacks activity.
This is not admissible! Indeed, existing forever by its essence it should
always have activity in the present. Besides, in your theory all past things
have the activity to give forth their results. Why not then in the present?
We hold that the present refers only to the activity of grasping a result in
dependence on a multitude of factors.
This reasoning doesn’t hold. Since the meaning of activity is univocal,
there would be things simultaneously present and past.
Now, the past denotes the absence of activity to grasp a result, while the
present denotes the existence of an activity to give forth a result. When this
activity is exhausted  said to come to an end.
It then follows that all these things would both perish and then perish
again. Consequently, it would follow that  arise and then arise again.
Therefore, the reasoning behind your theory is invalid. How can anything
be said to be able to project a result?
We hold that it disposes other factors that lead to its later arising.
When at the last moment  has exhausted all impure outflows,
he clearly does not project future results because they no longer arise. Thus,
his thoughts are certainly not present. They are neither annihilated again nor
do they enter into the past. If at first they have no activity in the present, then
how can you claim that later they fail and perish?
We hold that, although they lack activity  they can still be
destroyed again . This is how a past act must again be annihilated.
If  has already been annihilated and then is annihilated again,
it follows that something that has arisen again will once more arise. This
contradicts what you have asserted above.
We hold that even though the thoughts [of an arhat who has exhausted
outflows] do have the activity to engender subsequent results, because conditions are lacking the subsequent results do not arise.
This is not reasonable. If a result is never engendered, how can you know
that they have the activity to engender it? You are forced to state that these
thoughts  both counter and harmonize with two conditions,
because they would both exist and not exist: even though they arise from a
cause they lack any activity to engender a subsequent result! Therefore, this
theory that in sundry modes  can project a result is logically invalid.
Rather, we should conclude that because a seed can nourish a result, we
can speak about the projection of results. Your theory holds that the past and
the future both really exist. Then how would the future not be able to project
a result, just as the present does? If everything always exists, would anything
essentially ever not exist? Yet the scriptural passage  says that
 “produce their results when they encounter a convergence of conditions
and occasion.” You should explain just what, how, and in which state [an
act] can be described as “disposing other  that lead to the future
arising ,” called the projection of results because everything always
exists . Therefore, we deem invalid this theory that holds
that past acts essentially and really exist and can realize the future results
they give forth.
Special Realities—The Increase
and the Imperishable
Then one must admit that the two acts of body and speech, whether morally
good or bad, engender a special reality in the continuity of the aggregates,
which essentially and really exist and which is included among the aggregate
of formations not associated with mind. Some,  call this
reality the increase, while others,  call it the imperishable.
It is because of this reality that one can realize future results, whether agreeable or disagreeable. One must grant that mental acts must have such a
reality. Otherwise, when an alternate mind arises and the  disappears, how could that  realize a future result if such a special
reality were not elicited within the mental continuity? Therefore, one must
certainly admit that there is such a reality.
Critique of the Theory of the Special Realities of Increase and
Imperishability
If this is true, then, when one first studies a text and recalls it to memory
after a long period of time has elapsed, , or when one at firstsees or hearsthings
and recalls a memory of those things after a long period of time has elapsed,
at what instant is this reality  engendered?
Moreover, when one first enters the concentration of cessation, what reality
is elicited by the mind whereby one might later return from that concentration
and elicit a mind leaving concentration?
Moreover, if one were to dye the flowers of a citron tree with the juice of
purple lac, after both  perish, what reality is engendered
whereby the later result is that the pith of the fruit has a red color?
Therefore, we distance ourselves from this imagined special reality engendered by the two acts of body and speech.
The Evolutions of Mental Continuity
However, we conclude that a special kind of volition does exercise its permeations on the mental continuity, causing it to engender its activity. It is
due to the special evolution of such activity that the varieties of future results
occur. This is similar to dyeing the flowers of a citron tree with the juice of
purple lac—when the evolution of its continuity reaches its term the pith of
the fruit is colored red. We should recognize that the permeations of inner
states of consciousness is analogous.
When then do you not allow that the two acts of body and speech also
permeate the mental continuity?
Acts of body and speech become morally good or bad because they are
engendered from thought. Since they become morally good or bad because
of thought, it does not follow that they themselves can give forth future results
in a different mental continuity, either agreeable or disagreeable. It is not
that one thing performs the act and another experiences the result. Although
in fact an already performed act terminates, the mental continuity that has
been so permeated does experience a special evolution of its potentialities
and can realize future results, either agreeable or disagreeable.

The question arises: When the mental continuity of one abiding in a concentration of the cessation  or among the unconscious
gods is severed, how can an act prior  realize a
future result, either agreeable or disagreeable, ?
The theory of some  holds that in this
life a mind previously permeated necessarily returns to its continuity and
thus realizes its results, either agreeable or disagreeable.
If  has already been severed for some time, however, what
can cause it to reconnect ?
The mind entering into concentration is the immediately antecedent and
similar condition whereby it can bring about that reconnection.
That  has already come to an end long before. How then can it serve
as the immediately antecedent condition? We have already refuted the notion
that past acts can realize results. By the same token, this too is logically
refuted. Therefore, the mind that emerges from those concentrations is unconnected with .
Some others  hold that the mind after [emergence
from those unconscious states] returns because of the force of seeds that
adhere in the sense organs. These seeds that engender mind and mental states
rely as needed on two continuities, mental continuity and sense organ continuity.
Do the scriptures not teach that “Thinking and things  are the
causes that engender thinking consciousness?” Apart from thought, how can
thinking consciousness arise ?
You should recognize that the seeds of thought are sometimes referred to
as thought , as they speak about the result in place of the
cause, just as one might refer to hunger or thirst in place of the tangible.
Yet how can each thought and mental state arise from these  continuities of seeds? It is never observed that sprouts engender things from [two
sets of] seeds, or anything like this. It is possible that  engender a
single fruit in reliance on many conditions, but the arising of a single fruit
never comes from two seeds.
In your theory of returning  you fail to avoid the error outlined above. This is to say, when the mental continuity of one abiding in a
concentration bereft of mind or among the unconscious gods is severed, how
can an act prior  realize a future result, either
agreeable or disagreeable, [i.e., the reemergence of conscious life in any of
the destinies]?
Yet others hold that this opinion is erroneous.
What opinion?
The opinion that these states are devoid of mind. Some hold that these
states do possess mind. This is how we avoid this error. In the Inquiry, Blessed
Vasumitra says, “Those who hold that the concentration of cessation is entirely
devoid of mind encounter this error. However, I teach that even the concentration of cessation has a subtle mind and thus I avoid this fault.” He also
quotes the scriptures to demonstrate his interpretation, such as a passage that
states, “In those who abide in the concentration of cessation, the formations
of the body are eliminated, . . . but the sense organs remain unchanged, undestroyed, and consciousness does not leave the body.”
Well then, what is the consciousness present in that state?
Some hold that it is the sixth thinking consciousness.
Yet a scripture states, “Thinking and things  are the causes that
engender thinking consciousness.” The convergence of these three issues is
contact, and with contact sensation, conceptualization, and volition arise.
How then could the  states actually have a thinking consciousness without the convergence of these three, (i.e., thinking, things ,
and thinking consciousness)? Even if this was possible, how could these
three come together yet there is no contact? Even if that was possible, how
could contact be present without sensation and conceptualization? We are
speaking, however, about a concentration that has extinguished sensation
and conceptualization.
There is yet another interpretation of the Bhagavat’s teaching that “sensation causes craving.” Not every sensation invariably causes craving. This
same can apply to contact. Not every contact invariably causes sensation.
In other scriptures the Bhagavat himself has examined this issue. He
explained that “all sensation engendered by contact that is qualified by primal
ignorance is the cause engendering craving.” Nowhere has he identified the
contact that engenders sensation, however. Since he has not specified [the
different kinds of contact], yours is not a good interpretation.
Yet anotherinterpretation holdsthat the assertion that the phrase “the convergence of the three issues in contact” means that contact arises when these
three factors have the force to come together. In these  states,
however, the three factors lack the force to engender contact, or to engender
sensation or conceptualization, since the mind that enters into concentration
is extinguished. If indeed these states of concentration lack contact, then obviously
sensation and conceptualization will be absent. Therefore, in these states, all
that remains is the mental consciousness without any mental states.
If this is true, how can the mental consciousness in these states be morally
good, defiled, or undefined?
What error is entailed in these ?
If their nature is morally good, how then can that good nature not be associated with the roots of goodness, such as detachment and so forth? And if
they are associated with the roots of goodness, such as detachment and so
forth, then how could there be no contact?
What we assert is that this consciousness is good because it is projected
by an immediately antecedent and similar condition that is good.
This reasoning does not follow, since three kinds of mind, [morally good,
bad, or neutral], may arise immediately after a good mind. A good mind projected by the force of  good roots, however, would be incapable
of eliminating detachment and so forth, [and thus could not emerge as either
bad or neutral]. And if it lacks good roots, it follows that it could not become
good. Yet this concentration of cessation is good, just as cessation is good.
 if it is of a defiled nature, how then can that defiled
nature not be associated with the passions, such as covetousness and so forth?
If it is associated with the passions, such as covetousness and so forth, then
how could there be no contact? As the Buddha himself has taught in the
Scripture of Ten Questions, “All the aggregates of sensation, conceptualization,
and formation have contact as their cause.” Moreover, if a concentration
without conceptualization is not deemed to be defiled, this applies even more
to the concentration of cessation.
If you affirm that  is unobstructed and undefined,
 then does it arise from maturation, from deportment,
from craftsmanship, or from magical illusions? [These are the only morally
undefined states taught in the Great Book of Options that you follow.]
What error is entailed here?
If  arises from maturation, then how immediately after the concentrated mind  the summit of mundane being
can it still engender a mind born from maturation that pertains to the realm
of desire, because in the lower eight stages of meditation  has
been severed. Again, how could it be that immediately after one emerges
from this mind , one attains
and elicits a mind of utter non-agitation? In the Mahākauṣṭhila-sūtra a question
is asked, “After one emerges from the concentration of cessation, how many
contacts does one experience?”  answered, “Dear student, one
experiences three contacts: contact with non-agitation, contact with the
absence of being, and contact with the absence of image.”
Moreover, if  is projected by previous acts of
a maturing mind, what reason exists whereby the temporal force [of those
acts] present prior to the concentration of cessation does not go beyond the
time period for emerging from that cessation?
If the mind of concentration at the summit of being, focused on cessation,
were to reach its termination and then come to manifest as a mind maturing
karmic results, projected by the permeations of former acts in the realm of
desire, then why has it not done this during the previous states [of meditation
leading up to that concentration of cessation]?
Material forms arisen from elicited maturation that have been engendered
by that  have already been severed and do not continue. Why
then, when that mind engendered by maturation is severed , would they reconnect ?
Perhaps 
deportment, craftsmanship, or magical illusion.
Why would this mind take as its object deportment, etc.? In the absence
of contact  how could it have such activity?
Moreover, you admit that the nine progressive concentrations and the
eight liberations, all of which are cultivated, are all by nature good. Thus, it
does not follow that in these states there would arise either a defiled or a
morally undefined mind.
Moreover, employing the summit of being, focused on cessation as objective, and supported by a concentration that reflects on quietude, one realizes
entry into the concentration that eliminates sensation and conceptualization.
In the Mahākauṣṭhila-sūtra a question about the concentration of cessation
is posed: “How many are the causes and conditions on which one relies for
entry into the concentration on the imageless realm?”  answered,
“Dear monk, there are two causes and conditions dependent on which one
enters the concentration of the imageless realm: the absence of reflection of
any image and correct reflection on the imageless realm.” If, as you admit,
there is a mental consciousness in this concentration of cessation, what would
its object be? What would be its mode of operation?
What if its object is cessation and its mode of operation is quietude?
Then how could it not be good? If you grant that it is good, then why not
admit that it is associated with the roots of goodness, such as detachment
and so forth? If you grant that it is so associated, why then not admit that
contact is its cause for arising?
What if it has another object and another mode of operation?
How then could one engender a distracted mind immediately after the
mind of entry into the concentration of cessation? Isn’t this a contradiction?
If you imagine that there exists another undefined state [apart from the four
discussed above], you are not correct, because of the two causes . Therefore, you have incorrectly understood the meaning of the scripture and rashly
imagined that a sixth mental consciousness is always present in the concentration of cessation, and thus claim that these states have mind.
Vasubandhu’s Theory: The Subtle Mind
Well then, do you hold that the concentration of cessation is a state entirely
devoid of mind? Or does it have mind?
It is as some of the Sutrāprāmāṇikas think: a subtle mind is present in these
states. A consciousness that matures results, endowed with all the seeds [of
those results], from the first moment of taking birth until final death, evolves
in continuity without interruption. Throughout the various lifetimes, because
it is the cause of their maturation the various different continuities  flow forth, until it is finally eliminated at cessation. Indeed, because this consciousness is uninterrupted, one can say that
there is mind during these mindless states. One can also say that there is no
mind, however, because the complex of the other six consciousnesses do not
function at all in these states. It is because of the dominant force of the mind
preparatory to the concentration of cessation that the seeds of the six consciousnesses are temporarily suppressed and remain unmanifested. Thisis why [those
states] are said to be devoid of mind, but they are not entirely so devoid.
Mind has two varieties. The first is a mind that accumulates innumerable
seeds. The second is a polymorphous mind that functions with differences
in object and modality. Since this second  mind is lacking
in these states of the concentration of cessation, we say that it is “without
mind.” It is just as if a chair has one leg but is missing the other , we
say that it doesn’t have its legs. In states in which the seeds of the  consciousnesses are subdued, the consciousness that matures results evolves in
a special way from moment to moment, as the force of that suppression gradually diminishes  until it is entirely eliminated, just as the heat of
boiling water or the velocity of a released arrow gradually diminishes until
it are is exhausted.  the seeds of the
 consciousnesses again engender their results. At first the mental consciousness is again engendered from the seeds, and later the other 
consciousnesses are gradually engendered as conditions warrant. As explained
above, the consciousness that matures results harbors the various seeds of
all things. When it becomes manifest through the good or bad permeations
of the various other consciousnesses and their concomitant states, then the
force of the seeds inevitably increase. Because of this special evolution of
its continuity and in accord with the powerful maturation of the seeds and the
auxiliary conditions one encounters, one then engenders future results, whether
agreeable or disagreeable. There is a stanza that supports this interpretation:
Mind together with unlimited seeds
Continues in a constant stream,
Encountering conditions for specific permeations,
These seeds increase in the mind.
The force of the seeds gradually matures and
Gives forth its fruit when conditions converge.
Just as when one has dyed citron flowers,
The pith of the ripening fruit will be stained red.
In support of this, the Bhagavat declared the following stanza in the Great
Vehicle Scripture on the Explication of the Underlying Meaning:
The depth and subtlety of the appropriating consciousness
With all its seeds is like a violent torrent.
I have not revealed this to worldlings,
Fearing they would imagine it to be a self.
Consciousness
Since it continues onward and has the ability to appropriate a body [upon
rebirth into another life], it is called the appropriating consciousness. It is
also called the storehouse consciousness as it encompasses and stores the
seeds of all states. It is also called the consciousness that matures results
because  the projected actions of previous lives mature.
If one does not admit the existence of this maturing consciousness, then
what consciousness can appropriate a body? There is no other consciousness
that is adequate for taking up an entire body and remaining without abandoning
it until the end of a lifetime.
Moreover, what  sphere or aggregate is able to sever the passions
and their residues when their antidote arises?
We think that aggregate is found in the very mind that counters .
This is incorrect. How could that which conforms to those residues and
passions be able to counter ?
Moreover, when a mind, defiled, good, or without outflows, is generated
among beings born into the formless realm, where would these maturing states
that support those destinies lodge? Alternately, you would have to admit that
in these destinies the pervasive presence of states that are not maturation or
that are unconnected , but this contradicts reason.
Moreover, the result of a non-returner , when born into the
summit of being, is the eradication of the remaining outflows and the cultivation of the path that counters . Now, when the absence of outflows
occurs in the sphere of nonbeing, what is the specific reality at the summit
of being, what is the substance that continues to exist whereby  is deemed not to be dead? It is not true that a homogeneous existence
or a vital force,  exist separately as
realities apart from the mind and material form. These two are only metaphors
for the successive progression of the maturing aggregates. This successive
progression is not a distinct substance; it is just like the successive progression
of weeds in a field, [which does not entail any reality apart from the weeds
themselves]. Therefore, we must indeed conclude that apart from the complex
of the six consciousnesses, there does exist the essence of this seminal consciousness, as described above.
In support of this consciousness, in the canon of the Tāmraparṇīya [the
Buddha] established what is called the branching consciousness [between
two lifetimes]. The canon of the Mahāsāṃgika calls it the foundational consciousness. The canon of the Mahīśāsaka speaks about the aggregate that
remains until the end of transmigration.
What is the object and the mode of operation of this consciousness?
Its object and mode of operation cannot be identified.
Then why call it a consciousness?
In your theory there is another consciousness in states of the concentration
of cessation, object, and mode of operation, which are difficult to perceive.
The same applies here.
Within which of the appropriating aggregates is this consciousness
included?
It is only reasonable to answer that it is included within the appropriating
aggregate of consciousness.
If that is the case, then how do you interpret the scriptural passage, “What
is called the appropriating aggregate of consciousness? This refers to the
complex of the six consciousnesses.” Or again, “Conditioned by consciousness
is name and form. Consciousness refers to the six consciousnesses.”
We must recognize that these scriptural  have a special, underlying intent. It is just as a scripture says, “What is the aggregate of karmic
formation? This refers to the complex of the six volitions.” This does not
mean that in the aggregate of karmic formation there are no other states,
however. The same applies here.
What is this underlying intent when  speaks about the six
 and not about any other ?
It is asthe Bhagavat explained in the Explication of the Underlying Meaning:
I have not revealed it to worldlings
Fearing they would imagine it to be a self.
Why would the foolish imagine it to be a self?
This  has no beginning and lasts until the end of transmigration. Having a subtle mode of operation, it does not change. However,
the supports, objects, modes of operation, and varieties of the six consciousnesses are gross and easily understood, since they are associated with the
passions and the practices of countering , and since they
establish the categories of defilement and purification. In essence, they are
consciousness as result. Therefore, we infer that this seminal consciousness
does exist.
Because  teach only what is appropriate 
 did not teach about this causal consciousness in the scriptures,
as it would have been just the opposite of  he had
just explained. This was his underlying intent when he spoke about the six
 and not about the . As we have
already explained, in other canons he only spoke of the complex of the six
consciousnesses as the branching consciousness. Since the scriptures teach
only as appropriate, they are not opposed . Furthermore,
in each of the various canons untold scriptures are no longer extant, as we
know from the discussions in the Rules for Interpretation. Therefore, we
cannot assert that the store consciousness has never been discussed in the
scriptures; clearly it is reasonable that it was.
If this is true, then one person would have two consciousnesses active
simultaneously, the maturing consciousness and the other active consciousnesses.
What error is there in this?
If two consciousnesses are simultaneously active in the same one person,
it follows that they would simultaneously establish two sentient beings, for
those two consciousnesses would be active in different bodies.
There is no such defect , since these two consciousnesses
evolve in mutual support as cause and result and are not disassociated from
each other, and because the maturing consciousness is permeated by the other
active consciousnesses. It is not the case, then, that these two consciousnesses
are simultaneously active in different persons. Therefore, we avoid this fault
in reasoning.
Can you not see that the seed and the result of that seed are different continuities?
In the world we do observe that in the case of blue lotus flowers, the roots
and stems have different continuities, which lead to the production of fruit
from seed. This also applies to . Furthermore,
whether or not it can be observed by worldly seeing, if you do not grant that
the store consciousness exists, you commit the logical errors outlined above.
Thus, one must certainly admit that the store consciousness essentially exists
apart from the six consciousnesses.
Why then not admit that an essential self exists as the support for the complex of the six consciousnesses?
What would be the characteristics of this self you propose, which you
describe as the support of the six consciousnesses? If you admit that like the
store consciousness this self continuously arises and perishes, evolving
according to conditions, then how is it preferable to this  consciousness? Why would you proffer it as a self?
We claim that the essence of the self is one and eternal, forever unchanging.
How then can you say that  is supported by the permeations
of the consciousnesses that  from sensation? Now, these permeations
are the causes of the mental continuity thus permeated so that it evolves with
its distinct abilities, just as citron flowers, permeated and dyed by purple lac,
engender enabling changes in their continuities. If there were no permeation,
there would be no such evolution of different abilities. How then would the
many different permeations of former experience, knowledge, and attachment
arise much later as differences in memory, knowledge, and attachment?
Moreover, since the essence of the self is not altered, either within or after
emerging from unconscious states, there would be no consciousness. So how
could a subsequent thinking consciousness and the other  arise?
Moreover, what power does the self have over the consciousnesses that
would lead you to think that it is the support of those consciousnesses?
We say that the consciousnesses arise because of the self.
Yet if the essence of a self is forever unaltered, how could the consciousnesses arise, one after the other, at all? Why wouldn’t they arise simultaneously
and instantaneously?
We suggest that they must wait upon other conditions as aids for their
arising.
How can you be sure, then, that the existent self functions apart from these
other conditions in engendering ?
We say that the consciousnesses become active in reliance on the self.
As soon as things arise they immediately perish. Indeed, this is what their
instability means. How could they last and remain active? Therefore, we do
not allow the theory that the essence of the self is the support of the complex
of the six consciousnesses. Moreover, the theory that there is a self contradicts
the scriptural authority that says that “all things are without self.” Your opinion
of a unique and eternal self is entirely without true reasoning. It issues solely
from your mistaken emotions!
Therefore, we have demonstrated that special volitions simultaneously
permeate the store consciousness and cause its continuity to differ in all its
evolutions, projecting future results, either agreeable or disagreeable. They
are not characterized as bodily or verbal actions, as you assert.

Vasubandhu’s Sautrāntika
Theory on the Nature
of Action
If you do not grant that the two acts of body and speech exist, do you not
then contradict and slander the scripture on these two kinds of acts?
We neither contradict nor slander it. We are able intelligently to interpret
the scripture, so that we commit no error in its regard.
How do you interpret this scripture without error?
We avoid the poison of your opinion. We will explain in detail why the
scripture speaks about three acts, what is meant by an act of the body, what
the terms “body” and “act” mean, and what the terms “bodily action” and
“mental action” signify. These are our questions.
in the Scripture
Why then does the scripture only speak of the three acts of body, [speech,
and mind] and not about  sight, and so forth?
The scripture talks about the three acts to show that these three actions
comprehend the ten paths of action, because its intent is to encourage those
who fear there are too many things to be implemented. In a similar fashion,
 summarized the three trainings for Vṛjiputra. Some thought
that all acts are exclusively acts performed by the body, not by either speech
or mind. So the scripture speaks about the three acts to show that these latter
two are also to be performed.
The body denotes a special combination composed of all the basic great elements,  sensation. Action denotes a special volition.
Term “Body”
A body is that which is brought about by accumulation, since it is brought
about by the accumulation of atoms composed of the great material elements.
Some think that the body denotes the accumulation of the various kinds of
filth, because it is supported on various impure things. If this were true, however, then there would be no bodies among the gods.
Term “Action”
An act signifies a deed performed with intention by an agent.
“Bodily Action”
Bodily action denotes the volition that moves a body [to perform a physical
act]. There are three types of such volitions: the volition to deliberate, the
volition to decide , and the volition to put  into effect. The volition that moves the body is itself called a bodily
action, because that volition can engender the wind element that projects the
bodily continuity into a different place. To be exact, one would say “the act
that moves the body,” but here the term “move” has been omitted and the
text only says “the act of the body,” just as one might speak simply of “an
oil of strengthening” in place of “an oil that increases strength” or simply of
a “dust wind” instead of “a wind that moves dust.”
You should admit that in the path of the ten acts  the first three acts
are included in the acts of the body, i.e., taking life, taking what has not been
given, and  illicit sexual activity. How does the act of volition
deserve the same name?
Because it is an act of volition that moves the body to commit murder,
theft, or  illicit activity. That which is done through the power of
volition to move the body is identified as an act of volition. We commonly
say that violent rebels burned down a village or that the fuel cooks the rice,
.
Why then is volition called a path of action?
It is called an action because volition has activity. It is called a path of
action because it brings about the paths leading to good and bad destinies
and then engenders those . Alternately, the body that has been
moved is the path of the action of volition because the three kinds of acts of
volition function in reliance on the .
Moreover, killing, stealing, and debauchery are supported on the body,
because they arise from an act of volition. Thus they are called bodily actions
in accord with convention. Yet, in fact, such actions are themselves neither
good or bad; it is by convention that one provisionally establishes their  so that people in the world might cultivate
positive volitions and avoid negative volitions through the teachings. They
are labeled as good or bad only through provisional designation.
If only acts of volition are good or bad, then why does the Scripture on
the Path of Action say “It is because of the threefold  of the body, [i.e.,
killing, stealing, and committing debauchery,] that a volition initiates action,
and then performs and increases it. Because it is bad, it engenders the result
of suffering and the maturation of that suffering.”
The meaning of this scriptural passage is that the act of volition, which
moves the body, which employs the body as its means, which is supported
on the body and which takes killing, stealing, or debauchery as its object, is
the cause that influences the resultant maturation of suffering. While they
are called three kinds of bodily acts they are brought about by volition. The
other volitions,  are distinct from [the volition
that effects bodily communication] and thus are called acts of mind, because
they are associated with mind and neither move the body nor emit speech.
If this is true, why then does the scripture speak of two actions: the act of
volition and the act that has been willed?
Among the three types of acts explained above, the first two kinds of volition,  are called acts of volition; only the third
volition  is called an act that has been
willed. There is no error of contradicting the scripture here.
“Verbal Action”
Speech denotesthe enunciation of words. It is called speech because it manifests
the meaning of what one wishes to express. The volition that enunciates
speech is named a verbal action. Alternately, speech is the support of syllables,
etc., and it is called “speech” because it elucidates meaning by maintaining
the syllables, etc. To be exact, we would call it “an act that enunciates speech,”
but here the term “enunciates” has been omitted and  simply
calls it “an act of speech.” The examples are as given above.
“Mental Action”
Mind signifies consciousness. It is called mind because it can deliberate and
move toward the engendering of other  and toward  objects. The
volition that activates the will is called an act of willing, because it brings
about the willfulness to create various affairs, either good or bad. To be exact,
we should call it “an act that effects will,” but  omits the term
“effects” and simply talks about “an act of willing.” The examples are as
explained above.
If the three kinds of acts denote only volition, then in a distracted mind,
or in an unconscious state in which no mind occurs, how could there be discipline or laxity?
Because the seeds permeated by virtue of that special volition are not lost,
we speak about discipline or laxity . There is no error here.
We understand the special volition to communicate either the discipline or
laxity that such a superior thought elicits, since this volition permeates these
two kinds of superior seeds. As long as these two kinds of seeds have not
been lost, we provisionally establish the noncommunicative  of good
and bad discipline.
What do you mean when you say that one loses the seeds implanted by
this special volition?
We mean that these  are no longer active causes for engendering a
volition either for renunciation or its opposite, as they previously have been.
What can destroy these seeds?
We hold that a volition that engenders a communicative act causes the
abandonment of either good or bad discipline, as well as other causes that
also lead to their loss.
Classification of Actions
The reason  does not talk about acts of sight, etc., is because
it only treats the acts of effort of sentient beings, not the acts carried out by
all the sense spheres.
What are these acts of effort of sentient beings?
The activity brought about by the will of an agent.
What are acts carried out by all the sense spheres?
The separate abilities of the eye, ear, .
The Buddha explained the three actions, whose meaning is deep
 and subtle.
Relying on reason and doctrine, I have finished this wondrous
 discourse.
I vow to transfer this merit to save the host of beings,
Influencing them to quickly realize pure enlightenment.
 A Mahayana Demonstration on the Theme
of Action  One Fascicle
